---
# You don't need to edit this file, it's empty on purpose.
# Edit theme's home layout instead if you wanna make some changes
# See: https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults
layout: single
author_profile: true
---

Greetings and welcome to my ePortfolio! My name is Andy Diaz Lago and I will showcase the culmination of my work here at **Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU)**. Here you will find my final project’s self-assessment which includes a code review, and the artifact enhancements I have done during my CS-499 Computer Science Capstone to meet the five course outcomes required to pass the course.

During my time here in the Computer Science program, I have learned various concepts regarding the development of software in various fields. Each coursework I took presented different challenges for me to tackle, which led me to learn various programming languages such as Java, Python, C++ and JavaScript. I came to understand the program development life cycle on both agile and waterfall methods. Not only I learned to write code, but also the importance of how code is implemented. I learned to follow code guidelines, efficient coding algorithms to use, and the emphasis on security when building an application.
Moreover, the experience I acquired as I progressed through the program made me aware of the importance of the client, to fulfill the goals and needs of the company as well as the user. For this, I learned how communication and teamwork are a core value to have as a software developer, which is my primary field of focus.

 Some examples of the work that I have done in the past are as follows:
-	Scene recreation in C++ using graphic and visualization concepts using various shapes combined with transformation, scaling, and rotating methods. (CS-330)
-	Software Test and Automation in Java using various types of bound checking and Junit tests for input validation, throwing an exception when appropriate. (CS-320)
-	Thermostat application in Python that interacts with hardware and sensors to obtain the temperature and send the data over to a server. (CS-350)
-	Mobile Architect and Programing in Java with XML using Android studio to make an inventory management application. (CS-360)
-	Full Stack Development using the MEAN stack to build a travel website that interacts with both client and server using JavaScript, CSS and HTML. (CS-465)

Here are the five course outcomes that my final project addresses.

1.	Employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science. Strategies involve sharing insights with team members, which meets the goals of the company by providing clear communication of the functions, any changes needed or future development plans with the combination of ideas that fit the goals established. 
2.	Design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts. Here involves providing proper documentation and demonstration of the program to explain the functionality it has, which allows both technical and non-technical audiences to understand its purpose and obtain feedback to further improve the software.
3.	Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices. This pertains to the implementation of appropriate algorithmic practices that would allow the program to execute commands fast and effectively in as short of a time as possible.
4.	Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals. This is to apply any method appropriate to the programing language used to create a working software that meets the goals and requirements of the user.
5.	Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources. Crucial implementation of secure methods is necessary to ensure data is protected from any attempt to breach and exploit the information within. For this, a secure coding standard is followed to prevent any unauthorized access and keep the data safe, ensuring confidentiality and reliability.
	
In this self-assessment, I worked on my previous Gracioso Salvare project from CS-340, which is a software application developed in Python and Jupiter Notebook, to create and display a dashboard using CRUD functionality from a MongoDB database. This database contains data from the animal shelter obtained from a CSV file. It is used to import and display this information in a dashboard, with filters added for suitable dogs for search and rescue training. I performed all three of my planned enhancements using solely this artifact to fulfill all five course outcomes.

### Code Review
Before performing all the enhancements, I performed a code review to analyze the code and explore ways that I could improve or change it while conserving the necessary functionality required from the project. This allowed me to communicate my plans for the project and understand better how each function works, fulfilling ways to employ strategies to tackle that project and communicate my insights and objectives. 
Here is the link of the [CS-499 Code Review](https://youtu.be/DYEsWcrfLhQ).

### Enhancement One: Software Design and Engineering
This enhancement showcases my ability to recreate this project using a different language while displaying the needed information onto the console and apply the concepts I learned in C++. This artifact is enhanced with a menu that requires user input to display a table like the dashboard, with options to easily access information about the dogs that fit the criteria for each rescue type. The options allow users to access information using page handling by showing ten rows of data at a time and allowing users to navigate more entries by typing the page number. Moreover, users can see data that fits the criteria for all types of rescue Grazioso Salvare performs. This shows my ability to understand the needs and goals of the project and be able to use various tools and knowledge from a different programming language to create an application with that functionality.  Further improvements and additional functionality are made during the algorithms and data structures part of the enhancement plan. During this enhancement, I was able to demonstrate my abilities and skills to develop a program that follows appropriate coding practices and accomplish the industry-specific goals needed and write code that appropriately communicates the intended functionality for all kinds of audiences.

-Access to: [Enhancement One](https://github.com/AndyDiazL/CS-499-14571-M01-Computer-Science-Capstone/tree/main/Enhancement%20One/GraciosoSalvare)

### Enhancement Two: Algorithms and Data Structure
In this enhancement, I showcase my ability to apply my knowledge of algorithms to implement a sort and search functionality for the table. The previous project already had a predetermined method to sort the dashboard thanks to the use of Plotly’s open-source library for Python. In C++, I wanted to implement a function to sort the list both in ascend and descend order by the usage of the quick sort for faster iteration. I allowed users to sort by different options such as animal type, breed, color, name and sex upon outcome. I also implemented a search function that takes input from the user. First, the list must be sorted by animal ID to perform the search properly. Then, I used the lower bound algorithm to search the list which returns the iterator pointing at the entry that matches that given animal ID along with every piece of information related to it. However, if it is not found, then it will instead display that the animal ID could not be found and go back to the main menu. This added additional functionality in the code by implementing necessary algorithms that work fast and efficiently. This enhancement allowed me to demonstrate ways to apply algorithmic principles and computer science practices to work with data structures and display them to the user as they need.

-Access to: Enhancement Two

### Enhancement Three: Databases
In this enhancement, I made the transition from MongoDB database to use a MySQL database instead. I selected this item to demonstrate my ability to implement a different kind of database, to achieve the same goals of reading a CSV into MySQL and be able to create, read, update and delete content from a database table such as animal_shelter using C++. Not only was I able to implement necessary the necessary database skills to create those necessary functions, but I also applied secure techniques by including the proper libraries and making use of prepared statements when necessary to ensure safety against SQL injections during input. I have also expanded upon security by checking input extensively to prevent bad input from causing problems during the software execution. And finally, I included a secure login into the database for access, with an admin account and a guest account available that have their corresponding level of access. This enhancement fulfilled the last course’s outcome to develop secure software by designing code that prevents exploits, improves design and protects data and resources. It further improved the communication of said functions within the code and used more techniques and skills to implement the necessary solutions for the goals of this project, fulfilling all five outcomes.

-Access to: Enhancement Three
